feat: Dedicated cloud gateway overview and changelog (#7084)
Kong/docs.konghq.com: app/konnect/dedicated-cloud-gateways.md

---
title: About Cloud Gateways
content_type: concept
---

> Dedicated cloud gateways are API gateway data plane nodes in {{site.konnect_short_name}} that are completely managed by the cloud provider of your choice. You maintain control over the size and location of the gateway infrastructure, while Kong oversees the management of each instance and the entire cluster for you. This allows Kong to autoscale your nodes for you and reduces your operational complexity.

Author: ```suggestion
Dedicated cloud gateways are API gateway data plane nodes in {{site.konnect_short_name}} that are completely managed by Kong in the cloud provider of your choice. You maintain control over the size and location of the gateway infrastructure, while Kong oversees the management of each instance and the entire cluster for you. This allows Kong to autoscale your nodes for you and reduces your operational complexity.
```

---
title: About Cloud Gateways
content_type: concept
---

> Dedicated cloud gateways are a type of API gateway in {{site.konnect_short_name}} that are completely managed by the cloud provider of your choice. You maintain control over the size and location of the gateway infrastructure, while Kong oversees the management of each instance and the entire cluster for you.

Reviewer: Some verb tense agreement confusion here. Could either go with:

> Dedicated cloud gateways are a type of API gateway in {{site.konnect_short_name}} that *is* completely managed by the cloud provider of your choice.

or 

> Dedicated cloud gateways are *API gateway data plane nodes* in {{site.konnect_short_name}} that are completely managed by the cloud provider of your choice.

> You can manage your dedicated cloud gateways alongside all your other gateways in [Gateway Manager](https://cloud.konghq.com/gateway-manager/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can manage your dedicated cloud gateway nodes alongside all your other gateway nodes in [Gateway Manager](https://cloud.konghq.com/gateway-manager/).
```
Maybe I'm wrong about the terminology here, but we're talking about data planes nodes/instances here, right?

Reviewer 2: yes

![cloud gateway dashboard](/assets/images/products/konnect/gateway-manager/konnect-control-plane-cloud-gateway.png)
> _**Figure 1:** Example of the dedicated cloud gateway dashboard in Gateway Manager. The dashboard displays the total traffic, error rate, and P99 latency. It also displays the top five gateway services and routes by traffic, as well as the plugins and consumers associated with the gateway._

> Dedicated cloud gateways have the following benefits over a typical hybrid gateway:

Reviewer: Can you clarify this for me: can a control plane have a mix of dedicated and regular gateway data plane nodes? Or is each control plane limited to one node type? That might help clear up some confusion. By using the term "hybrid", this sounds like we're comparing a full gateway setup (control plane and data plane), where I thought that CGWs were data planes only.

"Typical" also seems like the wrong word to use here. That might make sense in a brief or something, but I imagine we don't want to position the non-CGW type of nodes as typical in perpetuity.

| Feature | Description |
| ------- | ----------- |
| **Pre-warm functionality** | You can pre-warm your cluster by specifying the number of requests per second so that the first requests don’t have to wait for the infrastructure to scale up. |

> | **Fast setup** | Configure and start your dedicated cloud gateway in four steps. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

> | **Kong-managed** | Kong manages the cluster for you, all you need to do is configure a few settings. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| **Kong-managed** | Kong manages the cluster for you, all you need to do is configure a few settings. |
```
Few settings should be explicit, like only configure the "___"

> | **One-click upgrades** | {{site.konnect_short_name}} handles upgrades for you. You decide when you want to upgrade and what {{site.base_gateway}} version you want to upgrade to and {{site.konnect_short_name}} does it for you. There's no downtime when upgrading the infrastructure. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| **One-click upgrades** | {{site.konnect_short_name}} handles upgrades for you. There's no downtime when upgrading the infrastructure. |
```

---
title: About Cloud Gateways
content_type: concept
---

> Dedicated cloud gateways are API gateway data plane nodes in {{site.konnect_short_name}} that are completely managed by Kong in the cloud provider of your choice. You maintain control over the size and location of the gateway infrastructure, while Kong oversees the management of each instance and the entire cluster for you. This allows Kong to autoscale your nodes for you and reduces your operational complexity.

Reviewer 2: I think we can use the word edge specifically in a context like this: 

``` "Public and Private mode", Public: powered by our Public edge DNS for clusters that are meant to expose APIs to the internet. ```

W

---
title: Dedicated Cloud Gateways
content_type: concept
---

Dedicated Cloud Gateways are data plane nodes that are fully managed by Kong in {{site.konnect_short_name}}.
	
You don't need to host any data planes, while maintaining control over the size and location of the gateway infrastructure. This allows Kong to autoscale your nodes for you and reduces your operational complexity.

Dedicated Cloud Gateways offer the following benefits:
* {{site.konnect_short_name}} handles gateway upgrades for you
* A public or private mode to decide who can view your APIs. In public mode, powered by Kong's public Edge DNS for clusters, you can expose your APIs to the internet. 
* Auto-pilot mode
* SOC1 compliant out-of-the-box
* Supported on the following AWS regions: Sydney, Tokyo, Singapore, Frankfurt, Ireland, London, Ohio, Oregon

You can manage your Dedicated Cloud Gateway nodes in [Gateway Manager](https://cloud.konghq.com/gateway-manager/).

> ![cloud gateway dashboard](/assets/images/products/konnect/gateway-manager/konnect-control-plane-cloud-gateway.png)
> > _**Figure 1:** Example of the dedicated cloud gateway data plane node dashboard in Gateway Manager. The dashboard displays the requests, error rate, and P99 latency. It also displays the cluster configuration, as well as the data plane groups and regions._

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
![cloud gateway wizard](/assets/images/products/konnect/gateway-manager/konnect-control-plane-cloud-gateway-wizard.png)
> _**Figure 3:** The Dedicated Cloud Gateway wizard in the {{site.konnect_short_name}} UI. The wizard allows you to configure the {{site.base_gateway}} version, mode, cluster region, and API access level._
```

> Dedicated Cloud Gateways are useful for the following use cases:
> 
> | Use case | Solution |
> | ------- | ----------- |
> | Reducing latency is important to your organization.  | Dedicated Cloud Gateways supports multiple AWS regions: Sydney, Tokyo, Singapore, Frankfurt, Ireland, London, Ohio, Oregon. |
> | Your organization operates in an industry with strict data protection and privacy requirements. |  Using the private gateway option, Kong provisions a private network load balancer and only exposes the IP address in the UI. |
> | Your organization needs high availability with zero downtime when upgrading data plane nodes. | There's no downtime when upgrading your data plane nodes. Additionally, you can pre-warm your cluster by specifying the number of requests per second so that the first requests don’t have to wait for the infrastructure to scale up. |
> | You have infrastructure in multiple clouds. | Dedicated Cloud Gateways allows you to run a multi-cloud solution that allows you to standardize API operations across the board to reduce complexity and increase agility. |
> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> ## How do Dedicated Cloud Gateways work?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## How do Dedicated Cloud Gateways work? {#dedicated-features}
```

When you configure your Dedicated Cloud Gateway, you can choose one of two configuration modes to create your data plane nodes:

* **Autopilot:** In Autopilot mode, you configure how many requests per second you expect the instance to recieve, then Kong pre-warms and autoscales the data plane nodes in the cluster for you.
* **Custom:** In Custom mode, you specify the instance size and type (for example, dev, production, or large production) as well as the number of nodes per cluster.

Because data plane nodes in Autopilot configuration mode automatically scale, you **cannot** manually increase or decrease nodes. You can only manually increase or decrease data plane nodes when the Dedicated Cloud Gateway is configured in the Custom mode.

Control planes in {{site.konnect_short_name}} **cannot** contain both Dedicated Cloud Gateway and self-managed data plane nodes.

> ![cloud gateway wizard](/assets/images/products/konnect/gateway-manager/konnect-control-plane-cloud-gateway-wizard.png)
> > _**Figure 3:** The Dedicated Cloud Gateway wizard in the {{site.konnect_short_name}} UI. The wizard allows you to configure the {{site.base_gateway}} version, mode, cluster region, and API access level._

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> ## How do Dedicated Cloud Gateways secure my APIs?
> 
> When you create a Dedicated Cloud Gateway, you have the option to choose between public or private API access. When you choose private API access, Kong provisions a private network load balancer and only exposes the IP address in the {{site.konnect_short_name}} UI so only your users can hit the private IP to access the gateway. 
> 
> When you choose public API access, Kong provisions public network load balancers. Each network load balancer gets its own IP set and DNS record that Kong exposes in the {{site.konnect_short_name}} UI, as well as a top-level domain record that uses latency based routing. 
> 
> In addition, you can reuse the public gateway for a private gateway. Even though the gateway has a public IP, it will never leave the AWS Backbone in the region, so it's still within the AWS infrastructure. If you want strict gateway isolation, you can create separate public and private gateways. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Let's move this to another doc

---
title: Dedicated Cloud Gateways
content_type: concept
---

Dedicated Cloud Gateways are API gateways that are fully managed by Kong in the cloud provider of your choice. 
	
With Dedicated Cloud Gateways, you don't need to host any pieces of the infrastructure yourself. You maintain control over the size and location of the gateway infrastructure, while Kong oversees the management of each instance and the entire cluster for you. This allows Kong to autoscale your nodes for you and reduces your operational complexity.

> Dedicated Cloud Gateways are the fastest way to configure and create a {{site.base_gateway}} in {{site.konnect_short_name}}. All you have to do is specify the security you want to use and pre-warm the cluster while {{site.konnect_short_name}} handles the cluster creation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> Dedicated Cloud Gateways also have the following benefits:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Dedicated Cloud Gateways offer the following benefits:
```

> * SOC1 compliant out-of-the-box
> * {{site.konnect_short_name}} handles gateway upgrades for you
> * Supported on the following AWS regions: Sydney, Tokyo, Singapore, Frankfurt, Ireland, London, Ohio, Oregon
> * Choose public or private mode to decide who can view your APIs. In public mode, powered by Kong's public Edge DNS for clusters, you can expose your APIs to the internet. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* {{site.konnect_short_name}} handles gateway upgrades for you
* A public or private mode to decide who can view your APIs. In public mode, powered by Kong's public Edge DNS for clusters, you can expose your APIs to the internet. 
* Auto-pilot mode
* SOC1 compliant out-of-the-box
* Supported on the following AWS regions: Sydney, Tokyo, Singapore, Frankfurt, Ireland, London, Ohio, Oregon
```

You can manage your Dedicated Cloud Gateway nodes in [Gateway Manager](https://cloud.konghq.com/gateway-manager/).

![cloud gateway dashboard](/assets/images/products/konnect/gateway-manager/konnect-control-plane-cloud-gateway.png)
> _**Figure 1:** Example of the dedicated cloud gateway data plane node dashboard in Gateway Manager. The dashboard displays the requests, error rate, and P99 latency. It also displays the cluster configuration, as well as the data plane groups and regions._

Dedicated Cloud Gateways are useful for the following use cases:

> | Use case | Cloud gateway solution |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Use case | Solution |
```

I'm not really a fan of cloud gateway solution. Problem: solution doesn't feel right.

| ------- | ----------- |

> | Reducing latency is important to your org. You need an infrastructure that is fault tolerant and has low-latency. | Dedicated Cloud Gateways are supported on multiple AWS regions: Sydney, Tokyo, Singapore, Frankfurt, Ireland, London, Ohio, Oregon. This helps you achieve high availability and regional failover so that if one region goes down, you can switch to another. You can use this capability to implement configurations like [cross-region DNS-based load balancing and failover](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/whitepapers/latest/real-time-communication-on-aws/cross-region-dns-based-load-balancing-and-failover.html). |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Reducing latency is important to your organization.  | Dedicated Cloud Gateways supports multiple AWS regions: Sydney, Tokyo, Singapore, Frankfurt, Ireland, London, Ohio, Oregon. |
```

Maybe link to the geo doc

> | Your organization operates in a regulated industry with strict data protection and privacy requirements. | Dedicated Cloud Gateways help ensure compliance by keeping data traffic within a secure, private network, reducing exposure to external threats. If you select the private gateway option, Kong provisions a private network load balancer and only exposes the IP address in the UI. Only your users can hit the private IPs to access the gateway.|

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Your organization operates in an industry with strict data protection and privacy requirements. |  Using the private gateway option, Kong provisions a private network load balancer and only exposes the IP address in the UI. |
```

> | Your organization needs high availability with zero downtime while upgrading data plane nodes. | {{site.konnect_short_name}} handles upgrades for you. There's no downtime when upgrading the infrastructure because when Kong performs the rolling upgrade, we synchronize the data plane node with load balancer registration and deregistration and gracefully terminate the old data plane nodes to reduce the impact on ongoing traffic. Additionally, you can pre-warm your cluster by specifying the number of requests per second so that the first requests don’t have to wait for the infrastructure to scale up. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Your organization needs high availability with zero downtime when upgrading data plane nodes. | There's no downtime when upgrading your data plane nodes. Additionally, you can pre-warm your cluster by specifying the number of requests per second so that the first requests don’t have to wait for the infrastructure to scale up. |
```
Maybe link to the upgrade doc?

> | Your organization uses several tools for API gateways and their infrastructure and you  want to reduce operational complexity. | Kong manages the cluster for you, all you need to do is configure the {{site.base_gateway}} version, configuration mode, cluster region, and the API access level. |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

| You have infrastructure in multiple clouds. | Dedicated Cloud Gateways allows you to run a multi-cloud solution that allows you to standardize API operations across the board to reduce complexity and increase agility. |

## How do Dedicated Cloud Gateways work?

{% include_cached /md/konnect/deployment-topologies.md topology='cloud' %}

> > _**Figure 2:** In a dedicated cloud gateway, the control plane is hosted in {{site.konnect_short_name}} and data planes are hosted in the cloud by Kong. The control plane connects to the database, and the data planes receive configuration from the control plane._

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> _**Figure 2:** Data planes are hosted in the cloud by Kong. The control plane connects to the database, and the data planes receive configuration from the control plane._
```

> When you create a Dedicated Cloud Gateway, {{site.konnect_short_name}} also creates a control plane for the cloud gateway. This control plane, like other {{site.konnect_short_name}} control planes, is hosted in {{site.konnect_short_name}} using the AWS infrastructure. Kong also creates, and manages, the data plane nodes in the AWS region that you specify while configuring the Dedicated Cloud Gateway.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When you create a Dedicated Cloud Gateway, {{site.konnect_short_name}} creates a control plane. This control plane, like other {{site.konnect_short_name}} control planes, is hosted by {{site.konnect_short_name}}. You can then deploy data planes that in regions close to yours users that will be managed by {{site.konnect_short_name}}. 
```

When you configure your Dedicated Cloud Gateway, you can choose one of two configuration modes to create your data plane nodes:

* **Autopilot:** In Autopilot mode, you configure how many requests per second you expect the instance to recieve, then Kong pre-warms and autoscales the data plane nodes in the cluster for you.
* **Custom:** In Custom mode, you specify the instance size and type (for example, dev, production, or large production) as well as the number of nodes per cluster.

> Because data plane nodes in Autopilot configuration mode are auto scaled, you **cannot** manually increase or decrease nodes. You can only manually increase or decrease data plane nodes when the Dedicated Cloud Gateway is configured in the Custom mode.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because data plane nodes in Autopilot configuration mode automatically scale, you **cannot** manually increase or decrease nodes. You can only manually increase or decrease data plane nodes when the Dedicated Cloud Gateway is configured in the Custom mode.
```
